You were saying that you were talking about the
strategic hamlets. Did you move people into these
villages? No, I never did. The only time I tried to
move some people was at a camp back in my first tour
and I was told
that we just could not do it. It was a camp, and I've
forgotten the name of it now, but at one time it had
the third largest or longest and best airfield in
Vietnam. And the problem was that there were no
people there, that most of the people had fled Q2
Viet Cong activity. As a matter of fact, it was one
of the largest camps in Vietnam, but there were
very, very few people there. And it had, prior to
1964, been very heavily populated.
And they had just all fled. And I wanted to move
people back out there, but there was no existing
road system The road system had been destroyed by
the VidCon, and primary resupply was by air. And I
had envisioned moving people back into that area,
those who wanted to come, give them support for a
period of time where they could grow their rice and
chickens and hogs and what have you. and to
repopulate the area where they can become more or
less self-sustaining, as well as having a surplus
to assist in feeding the local troops. But I faced
an insurmountable task in persuading anyone that
it would work. The local government, province
chief, to repopulate in that area. He felt that
once we had gotten the civilian populace out of
there, that everyone who remained was VC or VC
synthesizer. Therefore, it was obvious anyone
there was not friendly, and that was his problem. I
was
sent down from Okinawa
with two other officers to assist the U.S. 25th
Division in establishing their civil affairs and
asylum program when they came into the country. We
got there shortly before they did. One brigade was
in second port. I can't recall the name of the area
where they were.
I traveled out with the
first division, first U.S. division. And
unfortunately, as I arrived with the 1st
Division, they were going out on an operation. I
believe it was called Buck's Camp. But their civil
affairs officer had gone to Saigon to become
educated in the ways and the responsibilities of
civil affairs, psyops, refugee control, and this
sort of thing. And he was not there, so I didn't
didn't get a chance to talk to him, find out what he
was doing with his division's programs and what
kind of programs they had. My short visit with
them, I think, was about two weeks, and I became
rather hands-on involved with refugee control,
evacuation, feeding, safeguarding, and so forth
during that particular operation. And as a matter
of fact, we evacuated sort of 1,000
Vietnamese civilians from the Iron Triangle as it
became known,
the areas where the 1st Division was operating, in
order to clear out and deny the Vietcong a area of
operations for the civilian populace to hide in
the area called the Iron Triangle. This was just
after the first major battles in the Iron
Triangle? This was the beginning of the major
activities within the Iron Triangle, yes. At Chi
Chi, what was your job? Did you deal with the tunnel
rats? deal with the tunnel wrecks? No, not really.
I knew the engineers, some of them I knew a few of,
and knew slightly some of the tunnel wrecks in that
area. As a matter of fact, in our area where we moved
into just north of Coochee, the third gate I
believe it was the 3rd Brigade of the 25th Division
moved in there in, as I recall, late January or
early February, I'm not sure of the dates, of 1966.
We found an area there that appeared to be old
peanut fields that were not being worked at that
particular time. And that's where they decided to
put the 25th Division. The 1st Division had just
prior to that been operating in that area. But
there were a couple of villages close by. I'd say
within a half mile. And the village of Coochee
itself was about three quarters of a mile or a mile
south of that area. And it was not known until
later, I'm talking about after the war, how
extensive that tunnel system really was. We did
have tunnels within the area, and as a matter of
fact, They blew up one which was only about 50 feet
from the absolute inner water where the Tactical
Operations Center for the 3rd Brigade was. And
this was, it left a fairly good sized hole in the
ground. And of course this was later filled in
because we hadn't used the space for whatever. And
you want some war stories? What kind of tactics did
they use to fight? You never fought in the tunnels.
No, I did not go into any of the tunnels. I'm a pretty
good-sized boy. I just wouldn't fit into them.
Besides that, I have a high regard for my skin, and
it wasn't my job. I wasn't going into the tunnels.
What kind of tactics did they use to fight in the
tunnels, if any at all? Primarily, the tunnel rats
went in armed with concussion grenades and .45
missiles. And they would go into them and go as far
into them as they could go, commensurate with a
reasonable amount of safety. And usually only two
at a time, as I recall, would go into a tunnel. One to
lead the way and the other to back him up and pull him
out if he got hurt.
Because the tunnels were very, very small.
As I was told, I was never in one, that for a medium or
small size American, the most that they could do
would be hands and knees. and it was crowded on the
sides. Now, I'm sure that there were, and I heard
some of them talk about larger rooms in the tunnels
that they found. These larger rooms, however,
were not what you call American-sized larger
rooms or classroom-sized or anything of that
nature, what we would consider They were all very
crowded and very small scale. Even the larger
rooms probably were not more than 5 or 6 feet in
height at the very most and maybe 8 by 10, large 8 by
10 feet square. The ones that I was told about. I'm
sure that from what I have heard since the war was
over that they were, in other places, that they
were much, much larger. But they had to be much
deeper also than the ones that we were familiar
with. Most of the ones there were six to ten people
of the service at the most.
After they would crawl in and check them out, they
would attempt to destroy the tunnel itself by the
use of explosives. And they'd set a large charge of
explosives down with sandbags and so forth, and
then crawl out detonating it by wire, electrical
charges. Were you harassed more by guerrillas
here? We did have some,
and I think this is probably one of the tunnels that
we may have later found. We did have on occasion
sniper fire landing within the inner wire near the
tactical operations center. I don't believe that
There might have been a couple, three wounded. The
troops out on the perimeter, the battalions that
were on the perimeter, they did have a
considerable amount of harassment at night,
small arms fire primarily, and on one occasion, a
either grenade attack or The mortar attack, I'm
not sure which it was. I was not there at the time.
But I do know that they did have some small
explosions within the areas. This is perimeter
troops, battalions that did receive some
harassing fire. And this, of course, was almost
every night somewhere along the perimeter. You
mentioned other stories about the tunnels. Oh,
yes, I had a bright idea that we could probably
drown them out, and we had the equipment with us, or
at least the 25th Division did. They had a
jacuzzi-type water pump, and I'm talking about
the pumps that would throw a four or six inch stream
of water and we had the aluminum piping similar to
the manner in which they used the same type of pipe
for irrigation in West Texas years ago. And I had
what I thought was a bright idea that we could pipe
the water from the river up to one of the tunnel
entrances and drowned them out. But I was told by
the engineer officer that I spoke to that it just
wouldn't work. And I had other things to do and just
didn't carry through with it. I think probably
looking back in retrospect that none of us at that
time knew the extent of the tunnel system. And had I
known, had we known at the time how extensive it was
and the fact that they were allegedly
interconnected, that this would have been a
pretty good idea. But unfortunately, it was one of
those good ideas that,
not knowing the importance of it, I ignored it,
that they thought they were doing a pretty good job
with the tunnel rats and blowing most of them up and
denying their use to the Vietcong. And I just let it
slide. Didn't do anything about
it. What was the esprit of the Green Beret in
Vietnam after the first major buildup?
My experience with the Green Berets, After the
first major buildup, I was never again with the
Special Forces, other than just visiting on
occasion. What was their esprit de corps? As far as
I could tell, it was not as high as it had been. They
were continuing to operate somewhat as they had.
They were going more for, as I recall, long-range
patrols. They continued to operate their
training camps and continued to work as they
always had, but were placing more emphasis on
long-range patrols. And as I recall, they were
operating cross-border patrols into Laos and
Cambodia. to some extent, I think probably more
into Laos, trying to locate and cut the Ho Chi Minh
Trail. And of course, as we all know, the Ho Chi Minh
Trail was a number of trails. And as I have learned
Later, it was actually a quarter-way highway in
many places, protected by bamboo and tree
camouflage. It was a tunnel, above-ground
tunnel, so to speak, through vegetation in many
places for miles and miles. And I have no idea how
many man-hours spent building the tunnel, but I do
know that I heard stories from time to time, but I
was never privy to actually seeing a part of the Ho
Chi Minh Trail as such that I knew what I was looking
at.
What was the view, what was your view, what was the
general view of Westmoreland in his search and
destroy strategy?
I
really had
no understanding at that time of what a
search-and-destroy strategy was. The few
conversations I had with General Westmoreland
and the few times that I briefed him concerning the
activities of the 25th Division, civil affairs
and psyops, It appeared that he was a firm believer
in the idea of win their hearts and minds.
To me, he did not appear as bloodthirsty as he's
sometimes been made out to be. It appeared to me
that
the search and destroyer was search and find the
VidCon and destroy them. And since
those years it's appeared in publication and
writings of different types that it was a search if
you don't find anything destroy it type of thing.
At least this is the impression I gained from the
printed and electronic media at this time. That is
what was either going on or that's what the
reporters think was going on. I personally did not
see any destruction of civilian property other
than that which was absolutely necessary. And
most of the
unfriendly villages were left alone. If they were
not actively participating in the war, they were
left to do what they wanted to do.
Was there friction between the Special Forces and
regular forces of the Army? And if so, what was it
about? I'm going to give you one word answer, no. I
didn't see any friction between them. Now, there
may have been, But I was not privy to any friction.
The Special Forces that I knew, and I did not know
any in 1966,
the Special Forces camps were not within the areas
that I operated in 1966 because this was not the
ideal terrain. for the special forces to operate.
Was there any friction about whose tactics were
right? Should we have been using conventional or
unconventional tactics against the enemy? Or
what kind of tactics were? I really don't
understand that question.
You must understand, I think I understand what
you're asking, but if you're talking about
military tactics per se, the special forces and
regular forces or conventional forces tactics
are just not compatible. Conventional forces
primarily were designed and still are designed to
take and hold special forces tactics were
designed and are still in the unconventional
mode, fighting an unconventional enemy to seek
out and destroy the base camps, seek out and
destroy their lines of communications, and to
harass them on their lines of communications. Of
course the conventional forces had to adopt some
of that in their long range patrols as well as with
their short range patrols. And in many cases they
put the fairly large forces, large numbers of
troops on their lines of communications.
I'm sure that the regular forces were primarily
responsible for most of the search and destroy
type operations. We didn't like the term as such
because it
portrayed a different attitude than that which we
really had.
We were not there to destroy Vietnam. We were there
to safeguard the civilian populace and to protect
them. That was our feelings at the time. That was my
feeling, and I don't believe that I was too far
different from the average soldier I might have
been. What about the relationships between the
Green Berets and the Vietnamese civil
authorities during the build-up? And are you
referring to the 1966 era?
Well, I did not wear the Green Beret in 1966. I did
not want to call attention to myself as a Green
Beret. But
the
civil authorities that I knew were very
cooperative
with all the military. Now that does not mean to say
that they were
not looking out for number one. As a matter of fact,
that was the biggest headache that you saw or at
least that I saw during my entire Vietnam
experience that the
Vietnamese
civil government at district level it was a
military government and at province it was a quasi
military government But even so, be they military
or civilian, they had a tendency, and I hate to say
that they all were, but most of them were
very self-oriented,
meaning that if it was good for their career, if it
was good for the pocketbook, then by all means it
was good for them. It was good for everybody. But I
would say that by and large, the Vietnamese civil
government was very corrupt. And
there were many exceptions to that. But
unfortunately, I ran into a number that proved the
world wrong. They were cooperative. For
instance, if you had 1,000 sacks of cement to build
a school and it took 1,000 sacks, you better order
1,500 or 2,000 sacks. That's about the same for any
other commodity, building materials and so
forth. It just seems that
the corruption was pervasive.
When you left at the end of 66, did you think there
would be a Tet Offensive?
No. I knew the war was going to be coming to a close
before tomorrow, and I perceived incorrectly as
it later turned out. I believe the tail of Fancy was
the tail of 1968, was it not? Yeah, I see. And we're
talking about over a year. At the time I left there
in 1966, December I believe it was,
it was not a friendly war, but at the same time it
was, it seemed to be depressing that there was a lot
less activity
other than defensive on the part of the VidCon. I
believe that the government forces, including
U.S. forces, were pressing right along and with a
great deal of success. But naturally, there were
incidents where the VidCon did attack. and in most
cases against sometimes strategic hamlets,
sometimes engraved forces against special
forces camps. And on infrequent occasions,
primarily in the highlands,
the Viet Cong were able to build up and to operate
against
U.S. military forces to some extent, but not with
any great success. As I stated, it was primarily
defensive in nature. Why did you believe the war
was coming to an end? I believed our own
propaganda. And quite frankly, at that time, the
NBA had not come down in strength.
There were isolated instances of NDA units, but
the war was not being fought by NDA. It was being
fought primarily by VidCon.
The infrastructure of VidCon was on the run. Were
you, again, you were debriefed when you left. Did
anybody listen to what you had to say? Sure. My
debriefings were incorporated into area studies
that were ongoing within the Special Forces,
Special Action Force Asia. We're all about
debriefings.
When you left Vietnam in 1966, you eventually
ended up at Fort Polk to train troops before you
went back again. When you were training troops,
did you use the experiences in Vietnam to help you
train troops to go to Vietnam?
I used my experience primarily as a
self-motivator.
to motivate me and my NCOs, officers, to make them
understand the importance of training the troops
properly.
What did you think of the training process?
I was involved in basic training rather than
advanced individual training.
In 1967 in Fort Polk, we had the ideal training
environment, at least as far as we could have it in
an active post within the United States, being
that it was hot in the summertime. And the humidity
was high, which is the way it is in Vietnam. And we
began to acclimate our troops, at least the troops
that I had to train. They became rather well
acclimated to the heat and the humidity during the
summertime.
without having actual jungle to train in, I think
we did rather well. As a matter of fact, just as an
aside, Vietnam is not all jungle, and Vietnam is
not all rice paddy.
During a period of time, and I don't recall, I guess
it was during the 1964, I landed at a dirt airstrip
in C-123. And that, when I got off the airplane, I
looked around and I felt like I was a little bit of
deja vu. It was like Highland in New Mexico, the
high-level plains of New Mexico, burnt grass.
cactus, adobe, what appeared to be adobe
buildings around, and the terrain, short
distance around the airfield and as far as I could
see at that time, looked like the high mountains or
high plains of New Mexico.
You returned to Vietnam in May 1968 to May 1969 as
military advisor to the 51st Arvin Regiment, I
Corps near Da Nang. What did you think was the
result of the Tet? What do you think was the outcome
of the Tet? You're talking about the Tet
Offensive? The Tet Offensive of 1968. In my
opinion, and I am I'm still a firm believer that
this was the division between phase one of the
Vietnamese experience and the second phase of the
Vietnamese experience. I'm talking about the –
prior to this time, we had, and during the
so-called Tet Offensive We have been fighting the
Vietcong that is primarily most of the combat
operations have been carried out against
Vietcong that is indigenous South Vietnamese,
sometimes led by North Vietnamese, sometimes
augmented by North Vietnamese. The
Tet Offensive was a disaster for the I believe that
we, during the Tet Offensive and the months
immediately after, I'm saying for three to six
months after the Tet Offensive began, that we
effectively won the war that we had been fighting.
And I don't know to this day I can't put my finger on
any particular thing that eventually lost the war
in Vietnam or eventually caused us to leave and the
South Vietnamese to lose the war. But... How was
the morale in the ARVN and American forces? Very
high. Very high. As a matter of fact, Most of the
people that I knew subscribed to that feeling.
Most of the people that I knew had the feeling,
especially those who had been there during the Tet
Offensive. I was not. But most of the people that I
knew thought it was a winding down process, that it
was strictly a mopping up and clean it up, and we'll
be ready to go home in a few months. Because it
appeared that there was nothing else there to
fight, or very little. It was just about enough
exercise that needed to be carried on. You say that
you believe that we'd won the war we had been
fighting. What do you think that war was, in your
opinion? It was a guerrilla civil war up to that
point. with outside assistance from the North,
Vietnamese and, of course, Chinese and Russians.
But at this particular point, the Viet Cong as an
entity effectively ceased to exist. It was no
longer a civil war after that point, in my opinion.
In 68, 69, were the Arvin forces any better
fighters after five years of heavy training?
Well, the turnover was fairly significant all the
way through, considering that the South
Vietnamese were taking fairly heavy casualties.
And I still believe that the 51st Arvin was a rather
professional fighting force. They were
reasonably well trained, even by U.S. standards,
and they were well led.
In many cases, the officers were junior officers.
For instance, a captain would be commanding a
battalion in many cases. In the U.S. Army, a
lieutenant colonel commands a battalion. But if
you look at the experience of the officers we're
talking about, we're talking about six, eight,
ten, fifteen years' experience in the military.
And much of that time they had actually been on the
ground fighting the Viet Cong. And I think they
were, in many cases, very well trained. The
noncommissioned
officer corps, of course, many of those young men
had been in the Army at times similar to the
officers. Of course, there was always the new
troops' replacements coming in, being drafted
and brought into the military. And the primary
problem that they were having was that the pool of
manpower was beginning to become rather shallow,
that the conscription had been in effect for a
considerable period of time. And again, part of
the problem was the corruption of civil officials
who for a certain price could buy a deferment, or
the upper-class young men, they would naturally
go off to school in France or wherever. And
conscription, again, was rather unfair. And the
conscription teams, I heard tales of press gangs
going along and around the streets of Saigon
picking up young men and impressing them into the
military. I don't know if that's true or not. I've
just heard many, many stories about
it. How was the inter-service rivalry
between American forces? Do you believe that
hampered our victory overall in the war? Not at
all. I'm speaking from my own experience and there
was no particular rivalry between
Arvin and the U.S. Marine Corps in the period 1968
and 69, I was
fortunate enough to share an area of operations
with subordinate elements of the 1st Marine
Division. And with very few exceptions,
the U.S. Army advisors got along just great with
the US Marines. And because of this,
there was a great deal of rapport between the US
Army, that I was the representative of the US Army,
and my subordinates and my superiors were the
representatives of the US Army. And as I recall,
the senior American in the Corps was a Marine
general. I think his name was Cushman. But his
attitude called for cooperation between the
Marines and the U.S. Army and the Vietnamese
forces that were available in his Corps of
Operations, Area of Operations, which coexisted
with the Now,
late in that tour, there was an Army Corps also
stationed in that area, and I believe a General
Stilwell, he was a three-star general as I recall,
was the deputy to the Marine General. I'm not
absolutely positive about the command
structure. But the Vietnamese Corps commander
had his own personal Army advisor who was an Army
colonel. But the cooperation between the
services and between the nationalities between
the armies was good, always good. As a matter of
fact, my regiment You see, I began as a battalion
advisor, and after a few months I moved to the
regiment and the deputy regimental advisor for
the remainder of my tour. But our artillery
support was U.S. Marine artillery support. Our
aviation assets were either BNAF, Air Force, or
Marine aviation as far as When I say aviation, I'm
talking primarily fixed-wing bombers,
fighters, fighter-bombers. The helicopter
assets were U.S. Army assets, and we utilized
those Army assets. The Marine Corps utilized
them. And the made evacuation was either Vietnam,
that's Vietnamese Air Force helicopters.
Army helicopters are regular medevac choppers
that we had access to. And basically, as I recall,
there were no significant priorities between
Marine If
we needed artillery support, they gave it to us.
Sometimes if they were already firing a mission
for the Marines, they might get it quicker. They
would continue to fire that mission, and then they
might shift a battery to support us.